Docs: Add TPC-H and TPC-DS tutorials (#69877)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/getting-started/example-datasets/tpcds.md

---
slug: /en/getting-started/example-datasets/star-schema
sidebar_label: TPC-DS
description:  "The TPC-DS benchmark data set and queries."
---

# TPC-DS (2012)

Similar to the [Star Schema Benchmark (SSB)](star-schema.md), TPC-DS is based on [TPC-H](tpch.md), but it took the opposite route, i.e. it expanded the number of joins needed by storing the data in a complex snowflake schema (24 instead of 8 tables).
The data distribution is skewed (e.g. normal and Poisson distributions).
It includes 99 reporting and ad-hoc queries with random substitutions.

References
- [The Making of TPC-DS](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1182635.1164217) (Nambiar), 2006

> First, checkout the TPC-H repository and compile the data generator:

Reviewer: This is TPC-DS, not TPC-H.

``` bash
git clone https://github.com/gregrahn/tpcds-kit.git
cd tpcds-kit/tools
make
```

Then, generate the data. Parameter `-scale` specifies the scale factor.

``` bash
./dsdgen -scale 1
```

Then, generate the queries (use the same scale factor):

```bash
./dsqgen -DIRECTORY ../query_templates/ -INPUT ../query_templates/templates.lst  -SCALE 1 # generates 99 queries in out/query_0.sql
```

Now create tables in ClickHouse.
You can either use the original table definitions in tools/tpcds.sql or "tuned" table definitions with properly defined primary key indexes and LowCardinality-type column types where it makes sense.

```sql

> create TABLE call_center(

Reviewer: Why create is in lowercase but TABLE in uppercase?

    web_rec_end_date      LowCardinality(Nullable(String)),
    web_name              LowCardinality(String),
    web_open_date_sk      UInt32,
    web_close_date_sk     Nullable(UInt32),
    web_class             LowCardinality(String),
    web_manager           LowCardinality(String),
    web_mkt_id            Int32,
    web_mkt_class         LowCardinality(String),
    web_mkt_desc          LowCardinality(String),
    web_market_manager    LowCardinality(String),
    web_company_id        Int32,
    web_company_name      LowCardinality(String),
    web_street_number     LowCardinality(String),
    web_street_name       LowCardinality(String),
    web_street_type       LowCardinality(String),
    web_suite_number      LowCardinality(String),
    web_city              LowCardinality(String),
    web_county            LowCardinality(String),
    web_state             LowCardinality(String),
    web_zip               LowCardinality(String),
    web_country           LowCardinality(String),
    web_gmt_offset        Decimal(7,2),
    web_tax_percentage    Decimal(7,2),
    PRIMARY KEY (web_site_sk)
);
```

The data can be imported as follows:

``` bash

> $ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO call_center FORMAT CSV" < call_center.tbl

Author: True, rewrote it.

$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO store_returns FORMAT CSV" < store_returns.tbl
$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO store_sales FORMAT CSV" < store_sales.tbl
$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO time_dim FORMAT CSV" < time_dim.tbl
$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO warehouse FORMAT CSV" < warehouse.tbl
$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO web_page FORMAT CSV" < web_page.tbl
$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO web_returns FORMAT CSV" < web_returns.tbl
$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO web_sales FORMAT CSV" < web_sales.tbl
$ clickhouse-client --format_csv_delimiter '|' --query "INSERT INTO web_site FORMAT CSV" < web_site.tbl
```

Then run the generated queries.

::::warning
TPC-DS makes heavy use of correlated subqueries which are at the time of writing (September 2024) not supported by ClickHouse ([issue #6697](https://github.com/ClickHouse/ClickHouse/issues/6697)).

> As a result, many of below benchmark queries will fail with errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, many of the benchmark queries above will fail with errors.
```
